\subsubsection{Expanding conditional signals}
In future work, it will be valuable to explore additional conditioning mechanisms that could improve the model's ability to generate more diverse and contextually accurate patches. For instance, conditioning the patch generation process on properties such as stain-distribution, tissue-type, disease-type, and other relevant clinical variables could allow the model to better capture the specific characteristics of different histological settings. By incorporating these properties into the generation process, the model could produce patches that are more reflective of the diverse range of tissue types and pathological conditions encountered in real-world practice. This would also enable the model to adapt to the unique characteristics of different staining protocols, which vary between labs and can affect the appearance of histological samples.

\subsubsection{Generating larger tissue areas}
Furthermore, an interesting avenue for future research would be to explore the generation of patches conditioned on neighboring patches. This approach could enable the generation of larger tissue regions by stitching together individual patches, thus allowing for a more holistic representation of tissue architecture. By considering the spatial relationships between neighboring patches, the model could capture larger-scale tissue patterns that are critical for accurate histological analysis. This could open up new possibilities for the application of generative models in histopathology, enabling the synthesis of realistic tissue sections that can be used for various research and diagnostic purposes.

\subsubsection{Addressing biases in future work}
Finally, future studies could also consider further refining the model to address the biases present in the training data. Techniques such as domain adaptation, adversarial training, or incorporating real-world clinical feedback could be explored to mitigate these biases and ensure that the model produces more representative and equitable outputs across different tissue types and disease conditions.
