We have two expert pathologists review the synthetic patches generated using both real and synthetic masks as the condition. We use 60 patches for this review, 20 from the real set with their corresponding masks, 20 synthetic patches generated using real masks, 20 synthetic patches generated using synthetic masks from our mask generation model. The evaluation is performed on four criterion (Figure \ref{fig:qual_review}). First, The consistency of the patch with the corresponding mask where the experts are asked to evaluate if the patch and their corresponding masks match accurately in terms of the nuclei delineation. Second, if there are instances of unrecognizable nuclei types with respect to the annotated mask for each nuclei type in the patch. In this evaluation the experts are asked if the nuclei in the patch match their labels accurately. For each patch, the panel is asked to select the nuclei types that have at least one instance where they do not match the corresponding annotated label in the patch. The aim is to check if the model is able to generate convincing patterns in the synthetic patch for each type of nuclei. Third, if there are excess instances of nuclei in the mask with respect to the patch for each nuclei type, i.e. has the model failed to generate some nuclei that are present in the conditioning signal. The evaluators are asked to pick all nuclei types for which at least one instance is missing in the patch compared to the mask. The idea is to evaluate how effectively the model is able to generate all the nuclei instances that are present in the conditioning signal. Finally fourth, if there are excess instances of nuclei in the patch with respect to the mask for each nuclei type. Here, the panel is asked to select the nuclei types for which the model has generated an extra nuclei in the patch that is not present in the conditioning signal. The idea here is to evaluate if the model is generating extra nuclei in the patch outside of the ones required by the mask it is conditioned on. Overall, the expert review demonstrates that our end-to-end histology patch generation method is able to synthesize patches that are reasonably comparable to real histology patches. The survey used for the review can be found on a public typeform survey\footnote{https://l7d0z1f5um1.typeform.com/to/IkAbnEOv}. In Figure.~\ref{fig:qualitative}), we can see that the model is able to reasonably capture convincing visual structure for each type of nuclei.
