We would like to highlight that the expert evaluation presented in this work is conducted in the very specific setting of evaluators looking at $128 \times 128$ pixel patches of the Whole Slide Image which is not a natural way for evaluators to be analyzing histological tissues. The evaluation is only limited to the four mentioned criterion and should be generalized to support other claims about the applicability of these patches. We acknowledge that there might be medical patterns that the model is not replicating accurately that are not captured by the qualitative evaluation by our panel of pathologists. It should also be noted that the panel only includes two experts and should be inferred accordingly. We demonstrate the model on a colon dataset and the findings may not generalize to other datasets. The model only can create samples that resemble samples present in the training data distribution. Also note that generative models are known to replicate the biases present in the training dataset and do not correct for these biases inherently. As such, while our model models the training distribution reasonably accurately it is still expect to represent the biases that are originally present in the training dataset. In future works, further conditioning on properties like stain-distribution, tissue-type, disease-type, etc. would enable patch generation in varied histopathological settings. Further, future works can explore generation of patches conditioned on neighboring patches, as this enables generation of larger tissue areas by composing patches together. The model could be additionally conditioned on properties like stain-distribution, tissue-type, disease-type etc. to enable the framework to generate patches in varied settings.
